DSNP Operations (#215)
LibertyDSNP/spec: pages/DSNP/Identity.md

DSNP [Identifiers](Identifiers.md) form the basis for pseudo-anonymous streams of content.
While some users may choose to link or expose their real-world identity, DSNP implementations MUST NOT require such data exposure for account creation.
The [social graph](Graph.md) is formed using this Identifier so that a user's connections maintain integrity regardless of changes in any user's client choices or access changes.

### Pseudo Anonymity

* An Identifier MUST default to being disconnected from a real-world identity.
* An Identifier MUST be unique to the implementation.

## Ownership

A user's ownership of their identity is expressed via ownership and control of their pseudo-anonymous Identifier(s).

> Control entails the power to announce content associated with the Identifier and the ability to delegate permission to others to announce content on the user's behalf.

Reviewer: Control entails the power to perform DSNP Operations including publishing announcements that create, update and delete (tombstone) content associated with the Identifier, delegating these powers to others, managing keys associated with the Identifier, and retiring the Identifier [linked].

> Control entails the power to announce content associated with the Identifier and the ability to delegate permission to others to announce content on the user's behalf.

Reviewer: The last bit on retiring the Identifier will move to the Retirement DIP-220 PR.

### Key Management

An initial control key must be created in order to acquire an Identifier.
Optionally, an implementation MAY allow the user to add and remove additional keys.
An implementation MUST NOT allow the user to remove a control key if doing so would result in the user no longer being able to assert control.

#### Key Types

The following Key Types are used in DSNP Operations:

| Key Type | Serialized form (one byte) |
| --- | --- |

> | Control Key | 0x00 |

Reviewer 2: Since Control keys (AccountId) in the Frequency implementation are 4 bytes, I'm not sure what this is saying.

Control entails the power to announce content associated with the identifier and
the ability to delegate permission to others to announce content on the user's behalf.

### Retirement

A user may choose to retire their identity at any time.

> Once an identifier is retired, an implementation MAY remove all state data associated with that identifier, provided that an indication that the identifier is retired remains, so it may not be reused in the future.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to use an upper-case I on Identifiers as we use an upper-case A on Announcements?  The capitalization of Identifiers is not currently completely consistent within the document

Reviewer: I like that suggestion. I'll change all usage in that document.

Control entails the power to announce content associated with the identifier and
the ability to delegate permission to others to announce content on the user's behalf.

## Retirement

A user may choose to retire their identity at any time.
Once an identifier is retired, an implementation MAY remove all state data associated with that identifier, provided that an indication that the identifier is retired remains, so it may not be reused in the future.
This means that all data previously sent from the identifier, the control keys associated with the identifier, and the delegations (see next section) associated with the identifier may be removed.

> ### Delegation

Author: This was originally a sub heading of `## Ownership`. So we either want to move Retirement below it, or raise Delegation to `##` instead of `###`.

Reviewer: Thanks, will fix.

For example, an implementation might use the public key of an asymmetric key pair as a control key, and provide a proof for each operation by producing a cryptographic signature of the user's DSNP Identifier and some nonce value.

| Operation | Optional? | Principal(s) | Inputs | State Change Record |
|---------- |---------- |------------- |------- |-------------- |
| Create Identifier | no | User | Control Key, Control Key Ownership Proof | User Id Creation Record { User's Identifier, Control Key } |
| Retire Identifier | no | User | None | User Id Retirement Record { User's Identifier } |
| Define Delegation | no | User AND Delegate | User's Identifier, Delegate's Identifier, Set of Allowed  [Announcement Types](Announcements.md#announcement-types) | Delegation Definition Record { User's Identifier, Delegate's Identifier, Set of Allowed Announcement Types } |
| Revoke Delegation | no | User OR Delegate | User's Identifier, Delegate's Identifier | Delegation Revocation Record { User's Identifier, Delegate's Identifier } |
| Add Control Key | YES | User | Control Key, Control Key Ownership Proof | Control Key Addition Record { User's Identifier, Control Key } |

> | Remove Control Key | YES | User | Control Key | Control Key Removal Record { User's Identifier, Control Key } |

Author: Suggestion Only (Matter of visual syntax)

I don't quite get the `{}` syntax at the end of the State Change Record column. While it is trying to say these are the data items for the record, it is hard to parse in the format. I wonder if we want a different table of records or place to define each record to more clearly?

Perhaps another option is a subtable? (a bit gross for sure).

Another option might be separating out all the operations into a separate page and making each row a section? That would give a greater space to Inputs and State Change Record.

Reviewer: Yes, I agree the format is a bit lacking.

How about this:
* A page listing all Operations
* A page listing all Record types
* A simple list of Operations (simple names with links) on Identity.md and Announcements.md

This provides an easier format (a checklist of sorts) for implementations to refer to and use as a template.

Reviewer: OK I've updated this, let me know what you think.

* Announcements from a delegate MUST be able to be verified as to which delegate made the specific announcement.
* Delegation revocation MUST NOT be retroactive.

## Operations

> Each of the these MUST have verifiable approval of the acting
> principal(s) via signature proof or other system. For example, an
> implementation might use the public key of an asymmetric key pair as a
> control key, and provide a proof for each operation by producing a
> cryptographic signature of the inputs and some nonce value.

Author: ```suggestion
Each of the these MUST have verifiable approval of the acting principal(s) via signature proof or other system.
For example, an implementation might use the public key of an asymmetric key pair as a control key, and provide a proof for each operation by producing a cryptographic signature of the inputs and some nonce value.
```

| Operation | Optional? | Principal(s) | Inputs | Outputs/State Changes |
|---------- |---------- |------------- |------- |-------------- |

> | Create DSNP Identifier | no | User | None | New DSNP Identifier connected to User's Control Key |

Author: We don't call it a DSNP Delegation, should we shorten this to just Create Identifier?
```suggestion
| Create Identifier | no | User | None | New DSNP Identifier connected to User's Control Key |
```

Author: User's control key should be an input here right? Although perhaps that is implied by the User as Principal? We don't require it on `Add Control Key`, but the same could apply there.
```suggestion
| Create DSNP Identifier | no | User | Control Key, Proof of Ownership of Control Key | New DSNP Identifier connected to User's Control Key |
```

Reviewer: > We don't call it a DSNP Delegation, should we shorten this to just Create Identifier?

That certainly makes things more concise, and since that's the only type of identifier we're interested in, I think we can change "DSNP Identifier" to "Identifier" throughout the operation spec sections.

> User's control key should be an input here right? Although perhaps that is implied by the User as Principal? We don't require it on Add Control Key, but the same could apply there.

I agree, I think we can be explicit here that the control key (and proof) are parameters, since no user authentication context exists yet at the time of operation invocation.

> | Create or Update Delegation | no | User AND Delegate | User's DSNP Identifier, Delegate's DSNP Identifier, Set of Announcement Permissions | Proof of Delegation |

Author: I know we talked about this some and I think I was on the combined side, but I am still on the fence about if this should be one or two lines. Thinking now about the `DSNP on [Impl]` side where it could be separate and I'm thinking now we should always have a 1:m relationship with implementations. Implementations could have more than one per item in the Ops list, but it would never have to split the ops list for operations that do just half of what is specified. Thoughts?

```suggestion
| Create Delegation | no | User AND Delegate | User's DSNP Identifier, Delegate's DSNP Identifier, Set of Announcement Permissions | Proof of Delegation |
| Update Delegation | no | User AND Delegate | User's DSNP Identifier, Delegate's DSNP Identifier, Set of Announcement Permissions | Proof of Delegation with New Permissions |
```

Reviewer: From the point of view of an observable output record (the proof of delegation), I'm not sure there needs to be any distinction as long as the operation is idempotent. I see "Create or Update" (upsert, in developer-speak) a bit like a PUT operation in REST. Do you see a use case where an implementation would need to split it?

Author: Split use case is when an implementation needs to split it. Blockchain actions that could be combined are often separated to cause less on-chain work (and thus cost less). So I think it likely that an implementation have create and update separate.

It is different in Frequency:

- Create: `grant_delegation`
- Update: `grant_schema_permissions` AND `revoke_schema_permissions`

Reviewer 2: Is there a way to specify create/update and also allow them to be a united operation so long as the behavior is as specified?

Reviewer: Let's imagine a hypothetical "translation layer" converting DSNP operations to Frequency RPC calls. As long as this translation layer has the ability to access current state data (i.e. what delegation exists already), it can translate a "Define Delegation" call into any of grant_delegation, grant_schema_permissions, and revoke_schema_permissions. So for simplicity's sake I think there's a path to leaving it as a single operation in this spec.

| Revoke Delegation | no | User OR Delegate | User's DSNP Identifier, Delegate's DSNP Identifier | Proof of Delegation Revocation |

> | Retire DSNP Identifier | no | User | User's DSNP Identifier | Allowed removal of all data sent from User's DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all Control Keys from DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all User's Delegations |

Reviewer: So it looks like retiring an identifier is not actually described in the existing text of Identity.md, nor is it mentioned in the DSNP white paper. If it is a spec operation we should define it, which probably requires its own DIP and a spec version change.

Assuming we do define it, can we be more prescriptive here? If a DSNP Identifier is retired, and then there is a subsequent operation that attempts to use it, can we say it should not be allowed? (This is different from retaining data in storage, which is an implementation detail.)

> | Retire DSNP Identifier | no | User | User's DSNP Identifier | Allowed removal of all data sent from User's DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all Control Keys from DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all User's Delegations |

Author: Hmm.... Perhaps it is an optional spec piece? You are right about the data. That is a very implementation specific.

I would be ok with optional or removing this and making it just a part of the implementation spec.

> | Retire DSNP Identifier | no | User | User's DSNP Identifier | Allowed removal of all data sent from User's DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all Control Keys from DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all User's Delegations |

Reviewer 2: I don't think this should be optional. Arguments in favor, in no particular order:

1. We talk and have written about the ability to delete/retire many times. Leaving it out of the specification implies the right to be forgotten is optional or even orthogonal to DSNP, which to me doesn't make sense, especially since we're about giving users control over their social identity. "[those] who can destroy a thing, control a thing", or so some Herbert dude once wrote.

2. If we specify Tombstones why would we not support retiring identifiers?

3. Why eliminate the 'D' from CRUD just because it's identifier? What purpose does it serve to specify creation, updates, reads, but deny deletion (retire)?

4. Specifications often evolve well beyond white papers, so I don't consider that a strong argument against retiring identifiers.

A counterargument occurred to me that we don't specify any other operations regarding legal compliance, however, this is really the only portion of the specification that really applies, and leaving it out would explicitly ignore such laws. 

> Assuming we do define it, can we be more prescriptive here? If a DSNP Identifier is retired, and then there is a subsequent operation that attempts to use it, can we say it should not be allowed?

I think this is the best route, specify what should happen when the various operations include a retired identifier.

> | Retire DSNP Identifier | no | User | User's DSNP Identifier | Allowed removal of all data sent from User's DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all Control Keys from DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all User's Delegations |

Reviewer: @shannonwells I agree with your points. I think "Retire Identifier" should be a required (and well specified) operation. Since that is a spec change I will propose a new DIP.

> | Retire DSNP Identifier | no | User | User's DSNP Identifier | Allowed removal of all data sent from User's DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all Control Keys from DSNP Identifier, Allowed removal of all User's Delegations |

Reviewer: DIP-220 has been created for the ID retirement topic.
